title: Rust in 2020
Authors: Simon Walker
date: Thu 28 Nov 21:39:37 GMT 2019
category: tech
tags: rust

Wow what a year for Rust. 2019 has flown by (in real life as well), with so many
developments since the beginning of 2019. The 2018 edition has brought so many
quality of life improvements to day to day Rust development, especially the more
intuitive module system, NLL, and proc macros.

Rust 2020 has a lot to live up to!

Well...

My thoughts for Rust 2020 are perhaps a little less aimed at new features I want
to see than some other roadmaps, but more towards continuing the quality of life
improvements, and expanding the ecosystem. My thoughts can be grouped into:

1. Simplicity
2. A Greater Ecosystem
3. More Compile Time
4. Error Handling
5. Misc

## Simplicity

Rust has never been a _very_ simple language. Not like go or C. Certainly not as
bad as C++. I enjoyed being a beginner in Rust, being helped[^1] by the compiler
at every step. The language for a beginner was relatively simple: functions,
structs, traits and enums. This made for a very powerful language (particularly
the enums which are my favourite), yet a small surface area.

As I moved on I started looking more at generics (coming from C++ this was not
too complex for me) and traits in greater detail, but still not unsurmountable.

When I look at Rust code today, I see quite a lot of intimidating complexity.
For example this function definition from [diesel](https://diesel.rs/):

```rust
impl<T, U, Op, Ret, DB> QueryFragment<DB> for InsertStatement<T, U, Op, Ret>
where
    DB: Backend,
    T: Table,
    T::FromClause: QueryFragment<DB>,
    U: QueryFragment<DB> + CanInsertInSingleQuery<DB>,
    Op: QueryFragment<DB>,
    Ret: QueryFragment<DB>,
    {
    // ...
```

Or this seemingly magic incantation for command line parsing from
[cargo-edit](https://github.com/killercup/cargo-edit/blob/77be59f1f03672211bbce4ab5ccbe264eb6b7a3d/src/bin/upgrade/main.rs#L69):

```rust
#[derive(Debug, StructOpt)]
struct Args {
    /// Crates to be upgraded.
    dependency: Vec<String>,

    /// Path to the manifest to upgrade
    #[structopt(long = "manifest-path", value_name = "path")]
    manifest_path: Option<PathBuf>,

    /// Upgrade all packages in the workspace.
    #[structopt(long = "all")]
    all: bool,

    /// Include prerelease versions when fetching from crates.io (e.g. 0.6.0-alpha').
    #[structopt(long = "allow-prerelease")]
    allow_prerelease: bool,

    /// Print changes to be made without making them.
    #[structopt(long = "dry-run")]
    dry_run: bool,

    /// Run without accessing the network
    #[structopt(long = "offline")]
    pub offline: bool,

    /// Upgrade all packages to the version in the lockfile.
    #[structopt(long = "to-lockfile", conflicts_with = "dependency")]
    pub to_lockfile: bool,
}
```

I'm not singling these crates out by any stretch. I also understand that the
trait bounds in the [diesel](https://diesel.rs/) case enable a great amount of
power, and I admire the amount of clever code that is going on behind the scenes
of a crate like [structopt](https://crates.io/crates/structopt), but it is a lot
of additional boilerplate or magic.

I think Rust inhabits a nice space in that it's not too simplistic to fail to
describe common problem domains in the type system in a satisfying and
reasurring way[^2], and it's not so compilicated that is painful to read a page
of Rust code. I think for 2020 I'd like to ensure that this last point doesn't
happen. I'd like to see Rust be cautious in adding new sigils. The process from
explicit error handling -> `try!` -> `?` was excellent in my opinion[^3].

My worry is that Rust will start including magic items and follow the path of
Haskell, where every library invents new operators (e.g. Parsec has `<|>` and
`<?>`, lens has `%%~`, `^.`) etc. This hides a lot of information from new
users.

One area Rust shines in is documentation. A lot of this "magic" can be overcome
with good documentation and extensive examples.

## A Greater Ecosystem
## More Done At Compile Time
## Error Handling
## Misc

## Notes

Brief:
* What we'd like rust development to be like in 2020
* ideas about almost anything having to do with Rust: language features, tooling
  needs, community programs, ecosystem needs
* what will Rust 2021 theme be?
    * 2015: stability
    * 2018: productivity
    * 2021: ?

Ideas:

* simplicity
    * improvemnts for new starters to the language
    * rust started out with lots of sigils and characters with significant
      meaning. This is confusing to new rustaceans.
        * driven by my admiration but utter confusion with Haskell - so much
          functionality hidden behind operators
        * starts with the `?` operator - try was nice and explicit. I love the
          question mark operator, but it may be confusing to new rustaceans
        * attributes used for proc macros mean code can look quite messy, and it
          hides the implementation details, though typically this is third party
          crates so not your responsibility
    * not really changing the existing way of doing things, but being cautious
      about how many new sigils and annotations are added to the language
* greater ecosystem
    * before there was a push for 1.0 crates, i'd like to see the ecosystem
      _expand_ with more packages
    * consensus on some packages
        * e.g. tokio/async-std split
        * understandable given how young the language is, lots of people are
          developing new crates, particularly around async. the progression
          usually goes:
            - sync lib
            - async lib with futures 0.1
            - ooh new async/await features, need a _new_ crate with these
              features
* more stuff pushed to compile time
    * const fns
    * greater error catching and explanation of errors
* error handling and context around errors
    * anyhow and thiserror looking promising
* technical item: command line documentation a la godoc or pydoc
* usual suspects: compile times, ...

[^1]: helped is one way of putting it
[^2]: https://golang.org/
[^3]: https://thefeedbackloop.xyz/stroustrups-rule-and-layering-over-time/
